Add covid monitoring blogpost (#647)
usegalaxy-eu/website: _posts/2021-04-28-sars-cov-2-monitoring.md

---
site: freiburg
tags: [data, COVID-19]

> title: SARS-CoV-2 monitoring of raw open data for disease surveillance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Monitoring of raw open data for SARS-CoV-2 genome surveillance
```

supporters:
- denbi
- elixir
---

Recently, we started a large-scale project on the European Galaxy server for automatically collecting,

> processing and publishing COG-UK and other SARS-CoV-2 sequencing data. We aim to make all these steps fully open and accessible,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and analyzing raw sequencing data published by COG-UK and, potentially, other large-scale SARS-CoV-2 sequencing projects. As a unique feature, we aim to make all analysis steps leading from sequenced reads to lists of genomic variants and consensus sequences fully open and accessible.
```

> so you too can contribute data, wait for it to be processed, and visualize the results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Automated variant calling workflows

Every three hours, newly published COG-UK samples are processed to produce:

> * a public Galaxy history, which provides full data provenance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* public Galaxy histories, which provide full data provenance
```

* variants in VCF format
* alignment files in BAM format
* consensus sequences in FASTA format

These are subsequently pushed back to a public FTP server hosted by [CRG/BSC](ftp://xfer13.crg.eu). CRG then takes this data and
integrates it into the [Viral Beacon](https://covid19beacon.crg.eu/).

The scripts for the workflow automation are [publicly available](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/ena-cog-uk-wfs) together with [documentation](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/ena-cog-uk-wfs/blob/main/docs/manual.md). The analysis is based on [public, validated workflows](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.03.25.437046v1) that are available via [workflowhub.eu](https://workflowhub.eu/).

> Special care was taken to run this analysis on scale without disrupting normal Galaxy usage. In other words, we can monitor samples, while at the same time still run trainings and serve hundreds of other Galaxy users simultaneously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Special care was taken to run this analysis on scale without disrupting normal Galaxy usage. In other words, we can monitor samples, and at the same time still run trainings and serve hundreds of other Galaxy users simultaneously.
```

> If you want to process samples from your country, please get in touch with us and we will help you get things running!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want us to process samples from your country, too, please get in touch with us and we will help you get things running!
```

> ## Request processing of your own samples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Request processing of your samples of interest
```

> In addition, we wanted to make this resource useful for everyone, including non-Galaxy users. Therefore, we have opened up contribution via a simple GitHub repository: [https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/sars-cov-2-processing-requests](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/sars-cov-2-processing-requests). The idea is very simple; you just submit a file with URLs (ENA URLs for example) as a single file. This file makes up one batch of processing requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, we wanted to make this automated resource useful for everyone, including non-Galaxy users. To this end, we have opened up an on-demand analysis service via a simple GitHub repository: [https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/sars-cov-2-processing-requests](https://github.com/usegalaxy-eu/sars-cov-2-processing-requests). The idea is very simple; you just submit a file with URLs (ENA URLs for example) as a single file. This file makes up one batch of processing requests.
```

> One of the European Galaxy Team will check your contribution and approve it, after which Galaxy will pick those files up and process them with our standard pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Members of the European Galaxy Team will check your contribution and approve it, after which Galaxy will pick those files up and process them with our standard pipelines.
```

> Just as for the automated COG-UK data, all files are pushed back to the CRG FTP server. So in the end, after a few hours, (depending on the amount of URLs and the load on our servers) the user can either

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just as for the automated COG-UK data analysis, all files are pushed back to the CRG FTP server. So in the end, after a few hours (depending on the amount of URLs and the load on our servers), you can access the results through either:
```

> get the results from:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Galaxy via shared/public histories
* via the CRG FTP server

> and visualize them on the [Viral Beacon](https://covid19beacon.crg.eu) (probably a few days later).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and see them visualized on the [Viral Beacon](https://covid19beacon.crg.eu) dashboard (with a delay of probably a few days).
```

> We think this makes it even easier to analyze virus sequences for people that don't want to run their own workflows,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This should make it even easier to analyze viral sequences with Galaxy, in particular, for people who don't want to run their own workflows,
```

> but are still interested in specific samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but are still interested in specific batches of samples not covered by our automated monitoring efforts.
```

> ## Interactive ObservableHQ dashboard

Reviewer: Move this up above the user-requested analysis section.
